The two pillars of open company

Contemporary economic and behavioral theories present cogent arguments for the 'theory of the firm', which is a rapprochement between the social benefits of competition and the need for individuals to collaborate in order to achieve larger scale projects.  As part of our thesis, we challenge the balance of competetition and collaboration under this theory.  While in some cases competition is useful to serve diverse tastes in the face of the necessity to make definitive choices (a good example would be different programming languages that suit different programmer temperaments and programmer needs) - we think that society has come to overexaggerate the importance of competition.  Part of this is motivated by technological innovation; as tools for collaboration become more sophisticated, so do the options for individuals to band together towards common interests.  

Open companies directly promote collaboration via two philosophical "pillars":  The first is "operational transparency", and the second is "participatory inclusion".  Operational transparency is the disclosure of maximal information regarding the affairs of the company; this may include company decisions, company toolchains, negotiations with partners and clients, and company activities.  The second is "participatory inclusion", which is the precept that anyone should be able to contribute to the company decisions, company toolchains, or contribute to benefit the goals of the company.

Closed firms can result in two socially un-beneficial effects:  Siloization and reduplication of effort.  Operational transparency, and especially participatory inclusion, helps combat siloization; time and time again, a fresh pair of eyes from a different perspective can provide key insight that solves a sticky problem or expands the social benefit of a service.  Operational transparency can avoid reduplication of effort directly by allowing others to learn from your mistakes, and participatory inclusion can mitigate the cost of reduplication where it necessary to 'catch an idea up' to a branchpoint where strategies are forked.  The benefits of being open have long been understood in the software community, especially as expounded by Eric Raymond in "The Cathedral and the Bazaar", and our goal is, as Raymond prognosticates in this work, to "expand [openness] to other domains".

While not all businesses, organizations, or individuals will find themselves well-suited to operating under the principles of open companies,
our genuine hope is that more will as they realize the benefits.  Part of the role of the open company initiative is to act as loudspeaker to promote and share successes open companies are enjoying to motivate more companies towards openness.  Another part of the open company initiative is to provide networking opportunities for open companies to engage with each other, share with each other tips on how to run an open company, and provide moral support if maintaining openness becomes challenging.

Are open companies non-profit?

Being an "open company" does not mean that it is a non-profit.  Legal requirements do enforce "operational transparency" on the part of registered nonprofit organizations.  For example, annual budgets and pay lines for officers and major employees are subject to disclosure requirments, as are tax filings.  Moreover, through volunteership programs, especially among local and small-scale charitable organizations, nonprofits often embrace aspects of "participatory inclusion".  So registered non-profits are likely to find it easier and more natural to embrace the open company philosophy.  But there are certainly non-profits that remain closed to all but the minimum operational transparency (and even registered ones that fail in their minimal legal requirements) and restrict participation to their direct employees.

Secondly, being an open company doesn't mean that the company can't be a for-profit entity either.  Trust can be a valuable profit-driving asset for businesses, and our belief is that embracing the open company philosophy will engage the trust of more stakeholders than the traditional 'shareholder first' model to which contemporary corporate legal structures drive a bias.  While there are businesses that seek to serve the interests of many stakeholders under the belief that will indirectly benefit their shareholders, these are in the minority, and the open company initiative gives a direct framework that serving many stakeholders and gives a mechanistic rationale for how doing so enriches everyone (including shareholders).

Nonprofits and for-profits alike directly benefit by being open companies.  Operational transparency means that donors or shareholders have confidence in the soundness of the charitable or business model of the company.  Clients for both types of companies also gain a direct view into the operational details and can more effectively judge if the services provided are for them.  Competitors can also view into the operations and (if the company is effective) are likely to be wise to "stay away", preventing reduplicative social effort.  Participatory inclusion means that donors, shareholders, and clients have a direct line of intervention if they feel like the quality of service is declining or if the business is trivially missing an opportunity to improve or expand service.

Best practices for "open companies".

Beyond the two pillars of openness, we strongly encourage open companies to expand, explore, and share their own definitions of openness and what they think are best practices for open companies.  For example, gittip has described a more expansive definition covering, specificially the relationship between an open company and its employees, and how to manage compensation.  We don't necessarily expect all open companies to completely embrace operational transparency and participatory inclusion, or expanded definitions.  In some cases it may even be inappropriate.  For example operational transparency should not be applied where respecting individual client privacy is important; it might be reasonable to restrict participatory inclusion where safety or efficacy considerations require a level or expertise or training.  But we do expect open companies to explain why they are making these choices - and we strongly encourage open companies to tolerantly talk about and evangelize their own interpretations.

In many cases, adopting the two pillars of open companies will be costly for companies.  In some cases, it can take significant amounts of effort to maintain a level of operational transparency and successfully manage operational transparency.  We think it's worth it.  Morevoer, especially with the advent of the internet, the tools for doing so have never been more accessible or less burdensome.  As we enter an era where more companies are starting up to explore new markets to serve others in both for-profit and non-profit capacities, the open company initiative would especially like to encourage companies to adopt these practices at their inception, because cultivating these practices as a habit will make perpetuating them easier and over the company's lifetime, to the benefit of all of society.
