The Open Company Initiative (OCI) is a group of companies committed to
maximizing operational transparency and openness as a defining element in how
we create value.


### Our Vision

Trust is the foundation of the economy. The law establishes a minimum baseline
of trustworthiness, and the status quo for companies is to operate near this
baseline. How much more productive would our economy be if instead we worked
together to maximize trust?

We envision a world in which companies are generally trustworthy. We believe
that the winning companies of the future will be those that proactively
maximize trust, going above and beyond the letter of the law to cultivate
relationships of trust with customers, stakeholders, and society as a whole. We
believe that genuine, unforced corporate transparency and openness is the best
way to earn trust.


### Our Pledge

{% translate pledge %}


### Programs and Operations

The OCI maintains a [directory of companies](/directory/) that have taken our
pledge. However, the OCI is intentionally not a certifying body. Instead, we
invite our members to define for themselves how they will fulfill their pledge.
We invite innovation and the sharing of both successes and failures. We trust
the market and the court of public opinion to be our judge.

The OCI holds an [annual summit](/summit/), bringing together our members to
learn from one another and further our vision.

The OCI is housed at [The Saxifrage School](http://www.saxifrageschool.org/), a
higher education laboratory working to lower costs, foster transparency,
re-think the campus, and reconcile theory and practice. The Initiative is
funded [on Gittip](https://www.gittip.com/opencompanybiz), and we communicate
primarily [using
GitHub](https://github.com/opencompany/opencompany.github.io/issues). Some of
us can be found on the initiative's IRC channel on freenode: #opencompanybiz.


### Funding

The OCI is funded by pay-what-you-want membership dues, <a
href="https://www.gittip.com/opencompanybiz/">via Gittip</a>.

<div class="gittip-widget">
    <script data-gittip-username="opencompanybiz" src="//gttp.co/v1.js"></script>
</div>


### Further Reading

  - <a href="http://blog.gittip.com/post/26350459746/the-first-open-company">The First Open Company</a>
  - <a href="https://medium.com/building-gittip/4cbab7ca1a47">The Second Open Company</a>
  - <a href="https://medium.com/p/fdb74d1b4f0f/">Why Open Companies?</a>
  - <a href="https://www.balancedpayments.com/open">Embracing an Open Company Philosophy at Balanced</a>
  - <a href="/resources/whitepaper.pdf">A Whitepaper on Open Enterprise</a>
  - <a href="https://medium.com/the-saxifrage-school/1cc89b9de873">An Open School?</a>
  - <a href="http://theopencompany.net/pages/about-us">The Open [Products] Company</a>

